content/courses/python_introduction/io.md, before:

---
title: Input and Output
toc: true
type: docs
draft: false
weight: 7
menu:
  python_introduction:
    parent: Introduction to Programming in Python
    weight: 7
---

## Input/Output

Programs are not very useful if they cannot communicate their results.  They are also not terribly useful if they cannot change their controlling parameters to compute different results.

It is best to make your program read its input parameters, rather than embedding them (hard-coding) them into the program body.  You may want to change the parameters later or run it for many different sets of parameters.  You may give your program to somebody else who will have to modify it.  Always assume your program may later be used for a slightly different purpose, whether by someone else or by you.

### Console Input

The console is a text interface for input to and output from the computer.  In Spyder, the iPython window itself can serve as a console.  In Jupyterlab the output console is indicated by lines marked with `Out []` whereas a reference to an input console will open a textbox. 

To read input from the console we use the `input()` function (Python 3+).  In Python 2.7 the equivalent is `raw_input()`.  Any string within the parentheses is optional and, if present, if will be printed to prompt the user.  The input from the user is captured as a string and returned; it must be stored for any subsequent use.

The input (raw_input) function returns \_only_ a string.  If you need to use the values as any other type, you must perform the conversion yourself.
Example:

```python
weight=input("Enter your weight in pounds:")
print(type(weight))
weight=float(input("Enter your weight in pounds:"))
print(type(weight))
```

### Console Output

We have already been using the `print` function.  Let us now examine it in more detail.

The print function

* always inserts a space between its arguments
* always adds a newline character unless the `end` argument is added.
  * print(var,end="")

Messages can be added in between variables.

```python
h=1.45;
w=62.
print("Your BMI is",w/ht**2)
```

<details>
<summary>Exercise 14</summary>
<pre>
<p>
Use Spyder to write a <em>complete</em> program to compute BMI from weight and height input from a user.  First request the user's choice of units.  We have not spent much time with strings yet so you may use a digit to indicate the user's choice. Then request weight and height.  Remember that you will need to convert from strings.  Compute the BMI using the appropriate units and print the result to the console.   
</p>
</pre>
</p>
</details>

#### Formatted Output

So far we have only considered _list-directed_ input/output.  We leave it to the interpreter to format.  However, we often want or need more control over the format.  For this we define __format strings__.

Formats are indicated by a pattern

```python
F.wf
F.wg
F.we
```

F is the field width (total number of columns occupied), w is the number of digits to the right of the decimal point; these must be substituted by numbers. The letters f, g, and e are called _format codes_ and indicate floating-point (decimal point) format, general format (interpreter decides f or e), and exponential notation.  If we do not specify w for numbers, the default is 6 decimal digits printed.  If we specify the number of digits the interpreter will _round_ the result; if unspecified it will _truncate_.

Examples:

* Use exactly 15 spaces with 8 decimal places 
  * 15.8f
* Let the interpreter decide the total field width but use 8 decimal places 
  * .8f
* Print a float as an integer (this will truncate, not round, the decimal places)
  * 0f
* Print in scientific notation with three decimal places
  * .3e

Strings are specified with the letter `s`. They do not take a field width but can be adjusted or zero padded by using more advanced operations on the string to be printed.

Integers are specified by `d` (this stands for decimal, as in base-10 number) with an optional field width.  If the field width is wider than the integer, it will be padded with blanks by default.  If it is narrower it will be ignored.  If omitted the intepreter will use the width of the integer.  

To pad with zeros, write the zero in front of the width specifier.

Examples:

```python
5d
05d
```

### Formatters

To construct our formatted output we use _format strings_, also called _formatters_.  We insert curly braces as placeholders for variables in the finished string.  Format codes go inside the braces following a colon.

* print("The value of pi is approximately {:.6f}".format(math.pi))
* print("Pi to {:d} digits is {:.12f}".format(n,math.pi)

We have left the space to the left of the colon blank, but it represents the order of the arguments to `format`.  Thus the second example is equivalent to

* print("Pi to {0:d} digits is {1:.12f}".format(n,math.pi))

This means we can rearrange the output if we wish.

* print("Pi is {1:.12f} to {0:d} digits".format(n,math.pi))

Empty curly braces result in default formatting and ordering.  In this situation one could use list-directed formatting as well, but using a formatter enables more control over layout and spacing.

* print("I have {} books to read by {}".format(12,"tomorrow"))

<details>
<summary>Exercise 15</summary>

Type at the interpeter 

```python
import math
```

Practice printing math.pi
- Print without any formatting
- Print using the default f format
- Print to 5 decimal places 
- Print the integer part 
- For at least one of the above, add a message
- Print the number of digits to at least 6 spaces and pad with zeros
- Print the number with a message that specifies the number of digits, where the number of digits is also to be printed.

</details>

Even more sophisticated formatting is possible.  In the above examples, when printing pi the value of `n` had to be 12 or my output would be inconsistent.  In newer Python versions we can make the width a variable.

* print("Pi to {} digits is .{dec}f}".format(math.pi,dec=n))

#### Formatting with f-Strings

For Python 3.6 and up the _formatted string literal_ or f-string was introduced.  These can be used to create formatted output easily.

Example

```python
n=12
print(f"Pi to {n} places is {math.pi:.{n}f}")
```

The f-string evaluates the contents of the curly braces when the program is run.  That means that expressions can be used inside the curly braces.

```python
print(f"Pi to {n//3} places is {math.pi:.{n//3}f}")
```

In this example, the integer division is required because the result of the expression must be an integer.

If quotation marks are needed inside an f-string (such as for a dictionary key) they must be single quotes.  In addition, the backslash () cannot be a character within an f-string, so if a character such as the newline (\\n) is needed, it must be assigned to a variable.

## File IO

Most of the time we read or write from a file rather than from the console.  File input/output can be complicated in Python and we will later see some built-in means of reading particular types of files, particularly comma-separated-values (CSV) text files.

Before anything can be done with a file we must _open_ it.  This attaches the file name to the program through some form of _file descriptor_, which is like an identifier for the file.  Once opened we do not refer to the file by its name anymore, but only via the ID.

### Opening a File

We open a file and associate an identifier with it by means of the `open` statement.

```python
fp=open("filename")
fin=open("filename","r")
fout=open("filename","w")
```

The default is read-only.  Adding the `r` makes this explicit.  To open for writing only, add the `w`.  This overwrites the file if it already exists.  To append to an existing file, use `a` in place of `w`.  Both `w` and `a` will create the file if it does not exist.  To open for both reading and writing, use `r+`; in this case the file must exist.  To open it for reading and writing even if it does not exist, use `w+`.

### Reading from a File

The standard read commands in Python read _only strings_.  Even if the input values are intended to be numbers, they are read in as strings.  Any conversions must be done by the programmer.

Reading commands

* f.read()
  * Reads the entire file identified by `f` into one large string
* f.readline()
  * Reads a single line (including the newline character) from the file `f`
* f.readlines() 
  * Reads all the lines into a list, one line per list element.  Newlines are included.

We have several options to handle the strings when reading directly from a file.  One option is to use read, then split all the lines on the "\\n" character

```python
fin=open("filename","r")
the_file=fin.read()
file_list=the_file.split("\r\n")
```

We can now process through the list using a loop.  Note that we use `\r\n` to make sure we accommodate Windows, Mac OSX, and Linux operating systems.  

Yet another option is to use a Python idiom in which we iterate through the file using the file identifier.  Suppose we have a file with comma-separated values.  We can read the data with

```python
fin=open("filename")
for line in fin:
    data=line.rstrip("\r\n").split(",")
```

In the example above, we have not done anything to store the values of the data, so each time through the `data` variable will be overwritten and the previous values lost.  How we handle this will depend on the file and what should be done to its contents.  One common approach is to declare lists to hold the values in advance, then append as we go.

```python
fin=open("filename")
x=[]
y=[]
fin.readline()
for line in fin:
    data=line.rstrip("\r\n").split(",")
    x.append(float(data[0]))
    y.append(float(data[2]))
```

When we have completed this loop x will contain the values from the first column and y will contain values from the third column.  In this example we are not interested in the other columns.  We also convert on the fly to float.  This example assumes that our data file has one line of text header, which we use `readline` to skip.

We will not go into much detail about reading files since we will later cover packages that offer more convenient ways to read the most common formats.  

### Writing Files

To write a file it must have been opened appropriately.  We can use print with the addition of a `file=` argument.

```python
f=open("myfile")
print("Format string {:f} {:f}".format(x,y),file=f)
```

Corresponding to `read` there is a `write`.  It writes _one_ string to the specified file 

```python
fout=open("outfile","w")
fout.write(s)
```

The string can contain newline markers `\n` but `write` will not insert them.  They must be positioned explicitly.

Corresponding to `readlines` there is a `writelines`

```python
fout=open("outfile","w")
fout.writelines(seq)
```

here `seq` is a sequence, usually a list of strings.  The `writelines` will not add any end-of-line markers so as with write, they must be appended to every string in the sequence where a linebreak is desired.

### Closing Files

When you have completed all operations on a file you should close it.

```python
fin.close()
fout.close()
```

Files will be automatically closed when your script terminates, but best practice is to close them all yourself as soon as you are done with it.  You _must_ close a file if you intend to open it later in a different mode.  You cannot reopen a file using an active file descriptor.  You must first close it.

<details>
<summary>Exercise 16</summary>

Open a file 

```python
data.txt 
```

in write mode.  Write to the file three columns of numbers separated by commas.  These columns should be

```python
n n**2 n**3
```

for n going from 1 to 20.  
Read back the file.  Store each variable into a list.  Use these values to compute and print 

```python
a+bn+cn<sup>2</sup>+dn<sup>3</sup>
```

for 

```python
a=1., b=2.4, c=5.8, d=0.7
```

Print the results for each n you have.

</details>

## Exceptions

Many situations can result in an error.  

* An attempt to read a file that isn't present 
* A attempt to cast a string to a number when the string does not represent a number 
* An index out of bounds 
* A key requested is not in the dictionary 

All these conditions (and many more) are called __exceptions__.  If you do not handle them, the interpreter will, and it will just stop with some error message.  We can prepare for failure by _catching_ exceptions ourselves.

### Catching Exceptions

The interpreter _throws_ an exception so we can _catch_ it.  We can do this with a `try except` block.  

```python
try:
    fin=open("datafile.csv","r")
except IOError:
    print("Unable to open file.")
```

This stops on the named exception `IOError`.  Any other exception will not be caught.  It is not necessary to name exceptions; the following will be executed for any exception.

```python
try: 
    something
except: 
    print("Error")
```

More processing is usually required, of course.

The interpreter provides a large number of built-in exceptions.  (See the documentation for a complete list.)  Some of the more commonly encountered are 
\_EOFError
\_IOError
\_KeyboardInterrupt
\_IndexError
IKeyError
\_NameError
\_NotImplementedError
\_TypeError
\_ValueError
\*ZeroDivisionError

You can provide more than one `except` for the same `try`

```python
try:
   input=int(input("Please enter an integer:"))
except EOFError:
  print("You did not enter anything")
except ValueError:
  print("You did not enter an integer")
```

If you wish to do something particular when the `try` passes, use `else`

```python
try:
    fout=open("outputfile.csv","w")
except IOError:
    print("Unable to open file")
else:
    print("File successfully opened")
```

If you have code that should be executed whether the condition passes or failes use `finally`

```python
try:
   fin=datafile.read()
except IOError:
   print("Unable to read ",datafile)
finally:
   fin.close()
```

You cannot use an `else` in any `try` clause with a `finally`.

#### With/As

If properly supported, the `with` and `as` operators can replace the `try/except/finally` block.  This is probably most widely used with files.  The following will close the file whether the operation was successful or not.

```python
with open('myfile','w') as f:
    for n in range(len(mylines)):
        mystring="whatever"
        f.write(mystring+'\n')
```

Commit message:

Corrections to Python and some augmentation

content/courses/python_introduction/io.md, after:

---
title: Input and Output
toc: true
type: docs
draft: false
weight: 7
menu:
  python_introduction:
    parent: Introduction to Programming in Python
    weight: 7
---

Programs are not very useful if they cannot communicate their results.  They are also not terribly useful if they cannot change their controlling parameters to compute different results.

It is best to make your program read its input parameters, rather than embedding them (hard-coding) them into the program body.  You may want to change the parameters later or run it for many different sets of parameters.  You may give your program to somebody else who will have to modify it.  Always assume your program may later be used for a slightly different purpose, whether by someone else or by you.

### Console Input

The console is a text interface for input to and output from the computer.  In Spyder, the iPython window itself can serve as a console.  In Jupyterlab the output console is indicated by lines marked with `Out []` whereas a reference to an input console will open a textbox. 

To read input from the console we use the `input()` function (Python 3+).  In Python 2.7 the equivalent is `raw_input()`.  Any string within the parentheses is optional and, if present, if will be printed to prompt the user.  The input from the user is captured as a string and returned; it must be stored for any subsequent use.

The input (raw_input) function returns \_only_ a string.  If you need to use the values as any other type, you must perform the conversion yourself.
Example:

```python
weight=input("Enter your weight in pounds:")
print(type(weight))
weight=float(input("Enter your weight in pounds:"))
print(type(weight))
```

### Console Output

We have already been using the `print` function.  Let us now examine it in more detail.

The print function

* always inserts a space between its arguments
* always adds a newline character unless the `end` argument is added.
  * print(var,end="")

Messages can be added in between variables.

```python
h=1.45;
w=62.
print("Your BMI is",w/ht**2)
```

<details>
<summary>Exercise 14</summary>
<pre>
<p>
Use Spyder to write a <em>complete</em> program to compute BMI from weight and height input from a user.  First request the user's choice of units.  We have not spent much time with strings yet so you may use a digit to indicate the user's choice. Then request weight and height.  Remember that you will need to convert from strings.  Compute the BMI using the appropriate units and print the result to the console.   
</p>
</pre>
</p>
</details>

#### Formatted Output

So far we have only considered _list-directed_ input/output.  We leave it to the interpreter to format.  However, we often want or need more control over the format.  For this we define __format strings__.

Formats are indicated by a pattern

```python
F.wf
F.wg
F.we
```

F is the field width (total number of columns occupied), w is the number of digits to the right of the decimal point; these must be substituted by numbers. The letters f, g, and e are called _format codes_ and indicate floating-point (decimal point) format, general format (interpreter decides f or e), and exponential notation.  If we do not specify w for numbers, the default is 6 decimal digits printed.  If we specify the number of digits the interpreter will _round_ the result; if unspecified it will _truncate_.

Examples:

* Use exactly 15 spaces with 8 decimal places 
  * 15.8f
* Let the interpreter decide the total field width but use 8 decimal places 
  * .8f
* Print a float as an integer (this will truncate, not round, the decimal places)
  * 0f
* Print in scientific notation with three decimal places
  * .3e

Strings are specified with the letter `s`. They do not take a field width but can be adjusted or zero padded by using more advanced operations on the string to be printed.

Integers are specified by `d` (this stands for decimal, as in base-10 number) with an optional field width.  If the field width is wider than the integer, it will be padded with blanks by default.  If it is narrower it will be ignored.  If omitted the intepreter will use the width of the integer.  

To pad with zeros, write the zero in front of the width specifier.

Examples:

```python
5d
05d
```

### Formatters

To construct our formatted output we use _format strings_, also called _formatters_.  We insert curly braces as placeholders for variables in the finished string.  Format codes go inside the braces following a colon.

* print("The value of pi is approximately {:.6f}".format(math.pi))
* print("Pi to {:d} digits is {:.12f}".format(n,math.pi)

We have left the space to the left of the colon blank, but it represents the order of the arguments to `format`.  Thus the second example is equivalent to

* print("Pi to {0:d} digits is {1:.12f}".format(n,math.pi))

This means we can rearrange the output if we wish.

* print("Pi is {1:.12f} to {0:d} digits".format(n,math.pi))

Empty curly braces result in default formatting and ordering.  In this situation one could use list-directed formatting as well, but using a formatter enables more control over layout and spacing.

* print("I have {} books to read by {}".format(12,"tomorrow"))

<details>
<summary>Exercise 15</summary>

Type at the interpeter 

```python
import math
```

Practice printing math.pi
- Print without any formatting
- Print using the default f format
- Print to 5 decimal places 
- Print the integer part 
- For at least one of the above, add a message
- Print the number of digits to at least 6 spaces and pad with zeros
- Print the number with a message that specifies the number of digits, where the number of digits is also to be printed.

</details>

Even more sophisticated formatting is possible.  In the above examples, when printing pi the value of `n` had to be 12 or my output would be inconsistent.  In newer Python versions we can make the width a variable.

* print("Pi to {} digits is .{dec}f}".format(math.pi,dec=n))

#### Formatting with f-Strings

For Python 3.6 and up the _formatted string literal_ or f-string was introduced.  These can be used to create formatted output easily.

Example

```python
n=12
print(f"Pi to {n} places is {math.pi:.{n}f}")
```

The f-string evaluates the contents of the curly braces when the program is run.  That means that expressions can be used inside the curly braces.

```python
print(f"Pi to {n//3} places is {math.pi:.{n//3}f}")
```

In this example, the integer division is required because the result of the expression must be an integer.

If quotation marks are needed inside an f-string (such as for a dictionary key) they must be single quotes.  In addition, the backslash () cannot be a character within an f-string, so if a character such as the newline (\\n) is needed, it must be assigned to a variable.

## File IO

Most of the time we read or write from a file rather than from the console.  File input/output can be complicated in Python and we will later see some built-in means of reading particular types of files, particularly comma-separated-values (CSV) text files.

Before anything can be done with a file we must _open_ it.  This attaches the file name to the program through some form of _file descriptor_, which is like an identifier for the file.  Once opened we do not refer to the file by its name anymore, but only via the ID.

### Opening a File

We open a file and associate an identifier with it by means of the `open` statement.

```python
fp=open("filename")
fin=open("filename","r")
fout=open("filename","w")
```

The default is read-only.  Adding the `r` makes this explicit.  To open for writing only, add the `w`.  This overwrites the file if it already exists.  To append to an existing file, use `a` in place of `w`.  Both `w` and `a` will create the file if it does not exist.  To open for both reading and writing, use `r+`; in this case the file must exist.  To open it for reading and writing even if it does not exist, use `w+`.

### Reading from a File

The standard read commands in Python read _only strings_.  Even if the input values are intended to be numbers, they are read in as strings.  Any conversions must be done by the programmer.

Reading commands

* f.read()
  * Reads the entire file identified by `f` into one large string
* f.readline()
  * Reads a single line (including the newline character) from the file `f`
* f.readlines() 
  * Reads all the lines into a list, one line per list element.  Newlines are included.

We have several options to handle the strings when reading directly from a file.  One option is to use read, then split all the lines on the "\\n" character

```python
fin=open("filename","r")
the_file=fin.read()
file_list=the_file.split("\r\n")
```

We can now process through the list using a loop.  Note that we use `\r\n` to make sure we accommodate Windows, Mac OSX, and Linux operating systems.  

Yet another option is to use a Python idiom in which we iterate through the file using the file identifier.  Suppose we have a file with comma-separated values.  We can read the data with

```python
fin=open("filename")
for line in fin:
    data=line.rstrip("\r\n").split(",")
```

In the example above, we have not done anything to store the values of the data, so each time through the `data` variable will be overwritten and the previous values lost.  How we handle this will depend on the file and what should be done to its contents.  One common approach is to declare lists to hold the values in advance, then append as we go.

```python
fin=open("filename")
x=[]
y=[]
fin.readline()
for line in fin:
    data=line.rstrip("\r\n").split(",")
    x.append(float(data[0]))
    y.append(float(data[2]))
```

When we have completed this loop x will contain the values from the first column and y will contain values from the third column.  In this example we are not interested in the other columns.  We also convert on the fly to float.  This example assumes that our data file has one line of text header, which we use `readline` to skip.

We will not go into much detail about reading files since we will later cover packages that offer more convenient ways to read the most common formats.  

### Writing Files

To write a file it must have been opened appropriately.  We can use print with the addition of a `file=` argument.

```python
f=open("myfile")
print("Format string {:f} {:f}".format(x,y),file=f)
```

Corresponding to `read` there is a `write`.  It writes _one_ string to the specified file 

```python
fout=open("outfile","w")
fout.write(s)
```

The string can contain newline markers `\n` but `write` will not insert them.  They must be positioned explicitly.

Corresponding to `readlines` there is a `writelines`

```python
fout=open("outfile","w")
fout.writelines(seq)
```

here `seq` is a sequence, usually a list of strings.  The `writelines` will not add any end-of-line markers so as with write, they must be appended to every string in the sequence where a linebreak is desired.

### Closing Files

When you have completed all operations on a file you should close it.

```python
fin.close()
fout.close()
```

Files will be automatically closed when your script terminates, but best practice is to close them all yourself as soon as you are done with it.  You _must_ close a file if you intend to open it later in a different mode.  You cannot reopen a file using an active file descriptor.  You must first close it.

<details>
<summary>Exercise 16</summary>

Open a file 

```python
data.txt 
```

in write mode.  Write to the file three columns of numbers separated by commas.  These columns should be

```python
n n**2 n**3
```

for n going from 1 to 20.  
Read back the file.  Store each variable into a list.  Use these values to compute and print 

```python
a+bn+cn<sup>2</sup>+dn<sup>3</sup>
```

for 

```python
a=1., b=2.4, c=5.8, d=0.7
```

Print the results for each n you have.

</details>

## Exceptions

Many situations can result in an error.  

* An attempt to read a file that isn't present 
* A attempt to cast a string to a number when the string does not represent a number 
* An index out of bounds 
* A key requested is not in the dictionary 

All these conditions (and many more) are called __exceptions__.  If you do not handle them, the interpreter will, and it will just stop with some error message.  We can prepare for failure by _catching_ exceptions ourselves.

### Catching Exceptions

The interpreter _throws_ an exception so we can _catch_ it.  We can do this with a `try except` block.  

```python
try:
    fin=open("datafile.csv","r")
except IOError:
    print("Unable to open file.")
```

This stops on the named exception `IOError`.  Any other exception will not be caught.  It is not necessary to name exceptions; the following will be executed for any exception.

```python
try: 
    something
except: 
    print("Error")
```

More processing is usually required, of course.

The interpreter provides a large number of built-in exceptions.  (See the documentation for a complete list.)  Some of the more commonly encountered are 
\_EOFError
\_IOError
\_KeyboardInterrupt
\_IndexError
IKeyError
\_NameError
\_NotImplementedError
\_TypeError
\_ValueError
\*ZeroDivisionError

You can provide more than one `except` for the same `try`

```python
try:
   input=int(input("Please enter an integer:"))
except EOFError:
  print("You did not enter anything")
except ValueError:
  print("You did not enter an integer")
```

If you wish to do something particular when the `try` passes, use `else`

```python
try:
    fout=open("outputfile.csv","w")
except IOError:
    print("Unable to open file")
else:
    print("File successfully opened")
```

If you have code that should be executed whether the condition passes or failes use `finally`

```python
try:
   fin=datafile.read()
except IOError:
   print("Unable to read ",datafile)
finally:
   fin.close()
```

You cannot use an `else` in any `try` clause with a `finally`.

#### With/As

If properly supported, the `with` and `as` operators can replace the `try/except/finally` block.  This is probably most widely used with files.  The following will close the file whether the operation was successful or not.

```python
with open('myfile','w') as f:
    for n in range(len(mylines)):
        mystring="whatever"
        f.write(mystring+'\n')
```

### Resources

Full documentation is [here](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/inputoutput.html).  Details on format strings is [here](https://docs.python.org/3/library/string.html).

The Tutorialspoint [tutorial](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/python/python_files_io.htm) is helpful, but beware: it is for Python 2.7.  Input/output, especially console IO, is one of the areas with significant differences between Python 2.7 and Python 3.
