content/notes/globus-data-transfer/installation.md, before:

---
title: "Installing Globus on Your Computer"
type: docs
toc: true
date: 2023-02-02T00:00:00-05:00
weight: 3020

menu:
    globus
---

To transfer data to and from your computer, you will first need to install Globus Personal Connect. The following links provide instructions for installing Globus Personal Connect based on your machine's operating system.

{{< table >}}
| Platform | Installation instructions |
| --- | --- |
| Mac | https://docs.globus.org/how-to/globus-connect-personal-mac |
| Linux | https://docs.globus.org/how-to/globus-connect-personal-linux |
| Windows | https://docs.globus.org/how-to/globus-connect-personal-windows |
{{< /table >}}

The screenshots and set of instructions below show how to navigate to the installation links from the Globus homepage.

**Instructions**

1. Go to https://www.globus.org/
2. Click **“I Want To…”** > **“Enable Globus on my system”**
3. Scroll down to “Globus Connect Personal” (light blue box) and click the **“Get Globus Connect Personal”** link
4. Scroll down to “Install Globus Connect Personal” (light blue box)
5. Click the link for your operating system and follow the installation instructions

Download the software for your operating system:

{{< figure src="/notes/globus-data-transfer/imgs/globus_download_personal_connector.png" caption="Find the link to download for your operating system" width=700px alt="A screenshot of a Globus docs page with a download link and instructions for installing Globus Connect Personal." >}}

Install the software:

{{< figure src="/notes/globus-data-transfer/imgs/globus_install_personal_connector.png" caption="Download the application" width=700px alt="A Globus page, for granting permissions to Globus Connect Personal Setup. There is a text box to 'Provide a label for future reference.'" >}}

Commit message:

fix links for globus notes

content/notes/globus-data-transfer/installation.md, after:

---
title: "Installing Globus on Your Computer"
type: docs
toc: true
date: 2023-02-02T00:00:00-05:00
weight: 3020

menu:
    globus
---

To transfer data to and from your computer, you will first need to install Globus Personal Connect. The following links provide instructions for installing Globus Personal Connect based on your machine's operating system.

{{< table >}}
| Platform | Installation instructions |
| --- | --- |
| Mac | [Install Globus for Mac](https://docs.globus.org/how-to/globus-connect-personal-mac) |
| Linux | [Install Globus for Linux](https://docs.globus.org/how-to/globus-connect-personal-linux) |
| Windows | [Install Globus for Windows](https://docs.globus.org/how-to/globus-connect-personal-windows) |
{{< /table >}}

The screenshots and set of instructions below show how to navigate to the installation links from the Globus homepage.

## Instructions

1. Go to [the Globus homepage](https://www.globus.org/)
2. Click **“I Want To…”** > **“Enable Globus on my system”**
3. Scroll down to “Globus Connect Personal” (light blue box) and click the **“Get Globus Connect Personal”** link
4. Scroll down to “Install Globus Connect Personal” (light blue box)
5. Click the link for your operating system and follow the installation instructions

Download the software for your operating system:

{{< figure src="/notes/globus-data-transfer/imgs/globus_download_personal_connector.png" caption="Find the link to download for your operating system" width=700px alt="A screenshot of a Globus docs page with a download link and instructions for installing Globus Connect Personal." >}}

Install the software:

{{< figure src="/notes/globus-data-transfer/imgs/globus_install_personal_connector.png" caption="Download the application" width=700px alt="A Globus page, for granting permissions to Globus Connect Personal Setup. There is a text box to 'Provide a label for future reference.'" >}}
