content/courses/python-introduction/setting_up_environment.md, before:

---
title: Setting Up Your Environment
toc: true
type: docs
draft: false
weight: 11
date: "2020-11-17T00:00:00"
menu:
    python-introduction:
        parent: Introduction to Programming in Python
---

We will start by installing the Anaconda environment from [Anaconda Inc](https://anaconda.com).  Anaconda is widely used because it bundles a Python interpreter, most of the popular packages, and development environments. It is cross platform and freely available. [Download](https://www.anaconda.com/products/individual#Downloads) and install the Anaconda Distribution product appropriate for your operating system (Windows, MacOS, or Linux). The standard download will install some variation of Python 3 (version 3).

There are two somewhat incompatible versions of Python; version 2.7 is obsolete but still sometimes used.  Version 3 is the supported version.  We will use Python 3, preferably version 3.9 or above.  If you find that you need to use Python 2.7, Anaconda makes it easy to run both versions side-by-side through _conda environments_.

Anaconda will normally automatically detect your operating system but you should double check to be sure you are downloading the correct version.  On Windows and Mac, after the download is complete, install Anaconda in the usual way for your operating system.  When installing, we strongly recommend staying with the defaults unless you are experienced and very sure you want to make changes. The installer will encourage you to sign up for the Anaconda cloud service; you may ignore that and dismiss the popups. You can do this later if you wish. You may also ignore the suggestions for "reading" or "training."

On Linux, the installation is a shell script that you must run with
```bash
bash ~/Downloads/Anaconda3-<date>-Linux-x86_64.sh
```
Be aware that it will alter your `.bashrc` or other shell resource file. 

Multi-user Linux systems such as [Rivanna](https://www.rc.virginia.edu/userinfo/rivanna/overview/) may have Anaconda or other Python preinstalled.  See the instructions for your local system, such as [ours](https://www.rc.virginia.edu/userinfo/rivanna/software/anaconda/).

Once you have installed Anaconda, [find the Navigator application](https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/user-guide/getting-started/) in the appropriate menu for your operating system.  You should see a workspace similar to this

{{< figure src="/courses/python-introduction/imgs/AnacondaNavigator.png" caption="The Anaconda Navigator home screen." >}}

The Navigator will present many options that may change over time, most of which are not particularly useful to beginners. Not all are installed by default but can be installed with a click.  In this course we will use **Spyder** and **JupyterLab**, which should already be available.  If not, click the button to install the package.

On Windows you can start the Anaconda Navigator, as well as some other Anaconda tools, from the App menu.

If you are using Anaconda from a personal Linux or MacOS system and are comfortable using the command line from a terminal, you can start Spyder or  JupyterLab with
```bash
jupyter-lab &
spyder &
```
Alternatively, you can run the Navigator if you wish to start from there.
```bash
anaconda-navigator &
```

MacOS users in particular may find that Navigator may be very slow or tend to hang when started from the Launchpad.  Starting from a terminal can avoid this problem.

Both JupyterLab and Spyder may be fairly slow to start, so be patient.  JupyterLab will start an instance or a new tab of the default Web browser and run there. Spyder is a standalone application.

When using Anaconda, never install Jupyter/JupyterLab or Spyder independently; you can upgrade them with the Conda package manager.

Commit message:

Removing Anaconda from Python Intro, adding some tutorials

content/courses/python-introduction/setting_up_environment.md, after:

---
title: Setting Up Your Environment
toc: true
type: docs
draft: false
weight: 11
date: "2020-11-17T00:00:00"
menu:
    python-introduction:
        parent: Introduction to Programming in Python
---

In this course we will use the free [Miniforge](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge) distribution of Python and Python packages.  Miniforge is available for Windows, MacOS, and Linux.  Download the latest release version for your operating system from the above page, and follow the instructions to install the base.  Mac users: "Apple Silicon" refers to the `M` chips on newer Macs.  Please be sure to install the standard Miniforge3 and _not_ Miniforge-pypy.

There are two somewhat incompatible versions of Python; version 2.7 is obsolete but still sometimes used.  Version 3 is the supported version.  We will use Python 3, preferably version 3.9 or above.  If you find that you need to use Python 2.7, Miniforge makes it easy to run both versions side-by-side through _environments_.  At the time of this writing, Miniforge3 installs Python 3.10.4 by default with Release 23.0-0, but will later switch to Python 12.0. 

When installing, we strongly recommend staying with the defaults unless you are experienced and very sure you want to make changes. In particular, it is best to install it "Only for You."  

On Linux, the installation is a shell script that you must run with
```bash
bash ~/Downloads/Miniforge3-Linux-x86_64.sh 
```
Be aware that it will alter your `.bashrc` or other shell resource file unless you request that it not do so. 

Multi-user Linux systems such as [UVA HPC](https://www.rc.virginia.edu/userinfo/rivanna/overview/) may have Miniforge or other Python distributions preinstalled.  See the instructions for your local system, such as [ours](https://www.rc.virginia.edu/userinfo/rivanna/software/anaconda/). Typically, on a system such as UVA's HPC resource, you must load a [module](https://www.rc.virginia.edu/userinfo/hpc/software/modules/) before you can use the distribution.

On Windows, Miniforge will install a _miniforge prompt_ which will appear in your Apps menu under the Miniforge folder.  It can be used much like a terminal on Linux or Mac.  It will be aware of python, pip, mamba, and conda commands, but unless you add those to your personal PATH environment variable, which is usually not recommended, other `CMD` or `PowerShell` windows will not find those commands.

The default installation of Miniforge creates a _base environment_ consisting of a very minimal number of packages.  It uses a [package manager](courses/python-introduction/packages_environments) to install further packages.  You can choose `conda` or `mamba`.  In general, we recommend mamba as it is usually much faster than conda.

If you wish to install some of the more popular packages into your base environnment, open a terminal (Linux and MacOS) or a Miniforge prompt (Windows).  A good "starter pack" would be NumPy, Matplotlib, Pandas, Seaborn, Jupyterlab, and Spyder.  We would also like to upgrade our Python from the 3.10.4 in our current release version.  At your prompt type, all on one line,
```bash
(base)$mamba install python=3.11 numpy pandas scipy mkl seaborn numba jupyterlab ipython ipywidgets spyder
```
This will install many more packages than just those requested, since each will have packages on which they depend. 

You may also decide to keep your base minimal and set up
